# Kubernetes TLS Certificates and Certificate Signing Requests (CSR)

In this section, you will learn how Kubernetes Certificates API works. It covers the following concepts:

- Create Private key (.key)
- Create kubernetes _Certificate Signing Request (CSR)_ object
- Review CSR requests
- Approve/Reject CSR request
- Share the Signed certificate with users

## 01. Key Concepts

- In a K8s cluster, a Certificate Signing Request (CSR) is typically created by a user or service account who needs a client certificate to authenticate to the cluster.
- The creation process is usually handled programmatically by a controller or a command-line tool, rather than being manually created by an admin.
  - **Users or Service Accounts**
    - The entity requesting the certificate must have the necessary Role-Based Access Control (RBAC) permissions to create the CertificateSigningRequest resource.
    - They need the _create_ verb on the _certificates.k8s.io_ API group's certificatesigningrequests resource
  - **Automated Processes**
    - Tools like kubelet automatically create a CSR when a new node joins the cluster, requesting a certificate for itself.
    - Other common use cases involve service mesh systems (like Istio or Linkerd) and certificate controllers (like cert-manager) that automate the issuance of workload certificates.
  - **Cluster Administrators**
    - While administrators can manually create a CSR (often for bootstrapping or troubleshooting), the normal operational flow is designed for automated systems or end-users with limited privileges to initiate the request, which is then reviewed and approved by an authorized signer.

### Who can approve the CSR?

- **Cluster Administrators**
  - The primary approvers, using kubectl commands to manually review and sign (or deny) CSRs.
- **Automated Controllers**
  - For scale, custom controllers (like the Kubelet CSR Approver) can automatically approve CSRs that pass configured checks, often integrating with the core controller manager.

### How CSR Approval works?

1. **Request** - A component (like a Kubelet or user) creates a CertificateSigningRequest (CSR) object.
2. **Pending** - The CSR enters a Pending state, waiting for approval.
3. **Approval/Denial** - An administrator or controller approves/denies the CSR.
4. **Signing** - The Kubernetes CA (or specified signer) signs the approved request, issuing a certificate.

## 02. Hands-on Lab: Onboard a new user on K8s cluster using TLS Certificate based authN and approve the CSR using `Certificates API`

### Step-01: Generate private key for a User

```
USER_NAME="user"
# Generate a private key for a user, say developer
openssl genrsa -out $USER_NAME.key 2048
```

### Step-02: Create a Certificate Signing Request (CSR) object

```
openssl req -new -key $USER_NAME.key -out $USER_NAME.csr -subj "/CN=user@binorg.com"
```

### Step-03: User sends the CSR to the K8s Administrator

The user sends the CSR to the administrator who will be responsible for approving/denying the request and signing the certificate.

### Step-04: Create a CertificateSigningRequest object

- The administrator creates a CertificateSigningRequest object in Kubernetes using a YAML manifest file that includes the details of the user's CSR.

```
# Generate base64-encoded CSR
cat $USER_NAME.csr | base64 | tr -d "\n"
```

- **user-csr.yaml**

```
apiVersion: certificates.k8s.io/v1
kind: CertificateSigningRequest
metadata:
  name: user-csr
spec:
  signerName: kubernetes.io/kube-apiserver-client
  request: <base64_encoded_csr>
  usages:
  - digital signature
  - key encipherment
  - client auth
```

- The **request** field should be set to the base64-encoded CSR generated by the user.
- The **signerName** field should be set to the name of the certificate signer that will be used to sign the certificate.
- The **usages** field should be set to the list of intended usages for the certificate, which in this case includes digital signature, key encipherment, and client authentication.

```
# Create the CertificateSigningRequest object
kubectl create -f user-csr.yaml
```

### Step-05: Approve or Reject the CSR

```
# Get the list of CSR
kubectl get csr

# Approve the CSR
kubectl certificate approve user-csr

[Preceding command will sign the CSR using the appropriate signer and create a signed certificate object]

# (Optional) Deny the CSR
kubectl certificate deny user-csr
```

### Step-06: Share the signed certificate to the User

```
# Extract the signed certificate
kubectl get csr user-csr -o jsonpath='{.status.certificate}'| base64 -d > $USER_NAME.crt

# View Signed Certificate
openssl x509 -in $USER_NAME.crt -text -noout
```

- The administrator provides the signed certificate to the user.
- With the signed certificate, the user can now use it to authenticate to the Kubernetes cluster using client certificate authentication.
